README.md, before:

# Python
## 🔹 Terminal / Shell / Python Shell
Terminal - Allows you to run commands and also your programs.
There are other ways to execute code such as program in files.
- from shell enabling a programming context
- from files: which executes some program

In shell
write the command `python` which will reveal a python context for you to write some python and we will explore there for now


## 🔹 Values and Types
Types: classification of what a value represents
| Data Type | Python keyword | Examples      |
|-----------|----------------|---------------|
| Integer     | int          | 0, 4, -2, 87  |
| Floating Point Number | float | 1.2, -1.3, 11.0, 1.873 |
| Chain of characters / a string | str   | 'hello', 'yu', 'I am 9' |


- Numbers ( integers, float ): are writen as it is - typing numbers
- Strings: need to be wrapped by quotes ( single, double )
`"This is a valid string in python"
- and more that will follow...


## 🔹 Function
Named chunk of code ( snippet ) encapsulated in order  
to be invoked on demand to perform a specific task   
( the code within that function )  
It can also return a result ( output )  
It can also accept arguments ( values between parentheses )   
which are used within the code in within the function  
Depending on how we define the function.  
- invoke / call: the function named followed by parentheses
```py
# Defining a function
def say_name( name ): return name

# Invoking the function
say_name( "Lowla" )

# Once executed, in the shell we have the following result
# 'Lowla'
```

### Built in function
Python has its own functions we can use

```py
# Using built in function "type"
type( "Lowla")

# Using built in function "int"
int(123.123)

# Using built in function "float"
float(123)

# Returning 
# <class 'str'>
# 123.123
# 123
```


## 🔹 Expressions
An expression is a statement evaluated in the code such as conditions   
for instance, using built in keywords.
A combination of values and operators ( =, -, + , etc... )

### Special operators
`//` integer devision operators --> will enforce to return an integer  
`%` modulo operator --> return the remainder of a division
`**` power operator --> return the power of the 2 numbers combined

`==` comparison operator --> check if equal
`!=` not equal


```py
# Expression
1 + 1
# Returns 2

3 / 2
# Returns 1.5

3 // 2
# Returns 1

5 % 1.5
# Returns 0.5

2 ** 3
# Returns 8
```

Note: those evaluations are also ruled by   
the mathematics parentheses priority principle.


### Expression mixing values string and operators +

#### Concatenation
Adding a value to a string is called a concatenation
```py
"Hello " + "Lowla"
# Returns "Hello Lowla"
```

#### Text Multiplication
We can multiply a string value to repeat that one

```py
"Ha" * 3
# Retuns "HaHaHa"
```


## 🔹 Variables
Its a way to store a value to be re-used at different moment
and can be re-assigned by providing a different variable.
```py
# Pattern <name-variable> = <value>
my_name = "Lowla"

# Printing my_name
print(my_name)

# Returns the value
# "Lowla"

```


## 🔹 Variables naming
Naming convention in python is mainly snake case
`snake_case_variable`

Variable naming:
- can contain letters, underscore, number
- can not start with number
- should be different than the existing one
- should not be the same name of Python keywords   
( for, while, in, if, else, print, type, etc...)
- should not be the same as another variable name - to avoid overriding

## 🔹 Errors
Errors can happen while programming and should be anticipated in order to 
prevent our code / program to stop or crash.
Key to debug: read the error - which is insightful

### Different type of error in Python
- Syntax Error: a mispell / a non interpreted caracter  
- Name Error: refering to a keyword that is mispell  
- Semantic Error: wrong logic implemented even if the syntax is correct:  
  this could lead to an unexpected output. Ex: missing parentheses in an
  operation


## 🔹 F Strings
Allows to easilly include a or multiple values on a string dynamically  
Introduced in 3.7 Python  
Short for Formatted String  
Prepended by f followed by quotes  
Inbetween quotes it is your string and the  
dynamic value between curly braces  
Values can be variable, expression or functions returning a value.
```py
my_name = 'Lowla'
my_str = f'Name: {name}'
# Returns "Name: Lowla"
```

## 🔹 Objects, Attributes and Methods
**Objects** are way to organize data and functionality in Python
_Python is considered as an object oriented language - considering   
everything is an object: numbers, variable, functions, etc..._

**Methods** are functions in a context - bound to an object

**Attributes**: are stored value within an objects

From an object, accessing its methods or attributes is by appending a  
dot after

```py
# Accessing a string method "upper"
print("Hello you, How are you?".upper())
# Returns "HELLO YOU, HOW ARE YOU?"

# Accessing a string method "lower"
print("Hello you, How are you?".lower())
# Returns 'hello you, how are you?'
```

## 🔹 Scripts
Second way of writing python, not in the shell but in a file.
Using the shell - is useful when you want to check something  
but if you want to save and longer and maintain your code, it is  
best to move forwards a file that then you will execute with the shell
Within a script we can also comment bits of code for better maintainability
- the file must be <filename>.py
- executing the script / file : `pyton <filename>.py`
- example: `python main.py`

```py
# in main.py
# Demo coding in a file to execute it as a script

text = 'Please answer the follwing questions'
print(text)

upper_text = text.upper()
print(upper_text)

lower_text = text.lower()
print(lower_text)

# Feeding the script with the user interaction
user_name = input('What is your name ? ')
user_age = int(input('How old are you'))
print(f'Your name is {user_name} and you are {user_age}')

```

```py
# In terminal
# Executing the script
python main.py

# Returns 
# Please answer the following questions
# PLEASE ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS
# please answer the following questions
# What is your name ? Lowla
# How old are you ? 100
# Your name is Lowla and you are 100
```


## 🔹 Comments
Explaning some codes - those text are ignored for the code
execution but is useful for anyone reading it.
- inline comments
To create a comment: we need to add "#" at the beginning of the line
```py
# This is a comment
```
- multi line comments
To create a comment: we need to add "```" at the beginning of the line
this is called doc string
```py
"""
Multi
Line
Comments
"""
```


## 🔹 Data Structure
A data structure is a specific way to organise data,  
it is possible to have nested list, objects for instance
### Lists ( `[ <value>, <value> ]` )
- stores differents types of values
- syntax: values should be within square brackets separated by comma
- accessible via indexes wrapped by square brackets too  
( indexes are the position number starting with 0 )
- is mutable == can change values within
```py
favorites = [ 'Hey', 0 ]
# Returns [ 'Hey', 0 ]

type( favorites )
# Returns <class 'list'>

print(favorites[1])
print([ 'Hey', 0 ][0])
# Returns 0

print(favorites[0] === [ 'Hey', 0 ][0])
# Returns True

print(len(favirotes))
# Return 2

favorites[0] = 'Aloha'
print(favorites)
['Aloha', 4]
```

### Tuples ( `( <value>, <value> )` )
Tuples are list but non mutable
- stores data, any type of values
- syntax: values should be within parentheses separated by comma
- accessible via indexes wrapped by square brackets too  
( indexes are the position number starting with 0 )
- is non mutable

```py
my_tuple = (1,2,'hey')

# Will raise an error as tuple cannot be mutable
my_tuple[0] = 0
# Traceback (most recent call last):
#  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
# TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
```
Function or methods for list and/or tuples
| function or method | list | tuple | dictionary |
| ---- | ----- | ------ | ------ |
| len() | [x] | [x] | [x]
| .append() | [x] | [] | [] |


### Dictionaries ( `{ x: <value> }` )
Allows to organize the data structure by name instead of indexes.
Dictionaries as Word with its corresponding definition but here it is 
its value.

- stores data, any type of values in a key : value pair way
- syntax: key/value pair should be express within curcly braces
- accessible using square notation with the key: <variable-name>['<key>']
- values are mutable

```py
# Definiting a dictionary
my_dict = {
  'name': 'dictionary',
  'word_number': 1
}

# Accessing value with dot notation
print( my_dict['name'] )
# Returns 'dictionary'

my_dict['extra_key'] = 'something'

print( my_dict )
# Returns {'name': 'dictionary', 'word_number': 1, 'extra_key': 'something' }

```


## 🔹 `If` Statements 
Enabling to check for a condition in order for the program   
to apply the logic associated to that statement.
Indentation creates block = in this example, the code block
is the logic to apply

```py

if 2 == 2:
  print( 'is two')
# Returns "is two"

# Checking it is different - using `is not`
if 2 is not 1:
  print('Indeed 2 is not 1')

# Checking it is different - using `!=` prepended
if 2 != 1:
  print('Indeed 2 is not 1')

```

### `Elif` statement and `else` statement
`elif` Addon to a previous condition and not a default/ignored condition
`else` allows to close the condition to a fallback exit

```py
value = 2
if str(type(value)) == "<class 'str'>":
  print("The value is a string")
elif str(type(value)) == "<class 'int'>":
  print("The value is an integer")
else:
  print("The value is neither an integer nor string")
# Returns "The value is an integer"
```


## 🔹 Or and And operators
Used in conditions by eiher enable multiple condition (OR) or by combining  
statements to valid a condition


## 🔹  Loops
#### While loop
Keep iterate until the condition is not longer true

```py
# control variable
number = 10
while number != 0:
  print(number)

  # Ensures to decrease in order to go out of the loop
  number -= 1
```

Sequences: [ range, list, tuple, dictionnary ( keys are the iterables ) ]

#### for loop
Loops/Iterates over a fixed number of times
If a number of time is needed - `range()` can be handy to create 
a collection of iterables up to the number passed as parameter.
Handy to repeat a task x times.
##### loops & sequenced data structure
```py
number = 10
"""
for <variable-holder> in <sequence>
combined to range(10) --> creating a sequence of items
"""
for n in range(10):
  print( n )

"""
Returns
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
"""
```

#### loops & dictionary data structure
```py
person = { "name": "Smith", "age": 100 }


""""
When looping over dictionnaries, passing 1 variable would represent the key
"""
for key in person:
  print(f"The key is: \"{key}\"")

"""
When looping over dictionnaries, we can get value using square notation
"""
for key in person:
  value = person[key]
  print(f'The value for the key "{key}" is "{value}"')

"""
Returning:
The value for the key "name" is "Smith"
The value for the key "age" is "100"
"""


"""
Or we can get the iterables of values from the dictionnary
using <dictionnary>.values()
"""
for value in person.values():
  print(f'The value is "{value}"')
  
"""
Returning:
The value is "Smith"
The value is "100"
"""



"""
Or we can get the collection of tuples ( keys, values ) iterables from the dictionnary using <dictionnary>.items()
We must provide 2 variables in order to get the item of each .items() tuples
"""
for key, value in person.items():
  print(f'The key is "{key}" and its value is "{value}"')

"""
Returning:
The key is "name" and its value is "Smith"
The key is "age" and its value is "100"
"""
```

## 🔹  Modules, Libraries and Classes
Modules is like a toolbox - providing some functions / classes to use within the courese
Libraries can contain multiple toolboxes ( modules )
Classes are the tiny toolbox for a specific moment


### - Class
- template creating object ( blueprint - skeleton of an
object that could be used to shape multiple objets )
- initializers ( functions ) are provided to create instances  
( instance: an object created from the blueprint )
- class often have buidt-in methods to do tasks attached to the
  concern of this class



### Useful modules 
| Module | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| datetime | anyting related to dates |


```py
# Importing modules
import datetime

# Accessing class / functions from modules
# <variable> = datetime.datetime.now
now = datetime.datetime.now()

# Initializing a class and passing arguments to build the object
# with name arguments based 
new_years_day = datetime.datetime(year=now.year + 1, month=1, day=1)

```



# 🔹 Installing Python ( mac )

Step 1: Check for Existing Python Installation
Before installing a new version of Python, it's a good idea to check if you already have Python installed on your Mac, which can sometimes be the case.

1. Open Terminal: You can find Terminal in the Applications folder under Utilities, or simply search for it using Spotlight (Cmd + Space).

2. Check Python Version: Type python --version or python3 --version and press Enter. If Python is installed, this will display the version number.



Step 2: Download Python
To download the latest version of Python:

1. Visit the Python Website: Open your web browser and go to the official Python website](https://www.python.org/).

2. Download Python: Click on "Downloads" and select the latest version for macOS. The website typically detects your OS and suggests the appropriate version.



Step 3: Install Python 
Once the download is complete:

1. Open the Installer: Locate the downloaded file (typically in the Downloads folder) and double-click on it.

2. Follow Installation Steps: The installer will guide you through the process. Make sure to select the option "Install launcher for all users" and "Add Python to PATH" if available.

3. Complete Installation: Click “Install” and enter your admin password if prompted.



Step 4: Verify Installation
After installation: 

1. Open Terminal Again: As in Step 1.

2. Check the Version: Type python3 --version and press Enter. This should display the newly installed Python version.



Step 5: Install pip (If Not Included)
pip is Python's package manager and is used to install Python packages. It usually comes with Python, but if not:

1. Download get-pip.py: Visit https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py, and download the get-pip.py script.

2. Run the Script: In Terminal, navigate to the download location and run python3 get-pip.py.



# 🔹 Install Pycharm ( mac )
Prerequisites
- macOS: Ensure your Mac is running on macOS 10.13 (High Sierra) or later.

- Internet Connection: You'll need a stable internet connection to download PyCharm.

- Admin Rights: Be sure you have administrative privileges on your Mac to install new software.



Step 1: Downloading PyCharm
1. Open your Web Browser: Launch Safari, Chrome, or any other browser.

2. Visit the JetBrains Website: Go to the JetBrains official website.

3. Select the Edition: Choose between the Community Edition (free) and the Professional Edition (paid). Click on the “Download” button for the Community Edition.

4. Start the Download: The download should start automatically. If it doesn’t, click on the direct link provided on the webpage.



Step 2: Installing PyCharm
1. Open the Downloaded File: Locate the downloaded .dmg file in your “Downloads” folder and double-click to open it.

2. Install PyCharm: A new window will appear with the PyCharm icon and the “Applications” folder. Drag the PyCharm icon to the “Applications” folder. This will copy PyCharm into your Applications.

3. Wait for the Copy to Finish: This might take a few minutes depending on your Mac's performance.



Step 3: Running PyCharm
1. Open PyCharm: Go to your “Applications” folder and find PyCharm. Double-click to open it.

2. Initial Setup: The first time you open PyCharm, you’ll go through an initial setup process. This includes accepting the license agreement and configuring the IDE according to your preferences (like choosing a theme).

## 🔹 Installing Python ( windows )
Step 1: Download Python
1. Visit the Official Python Website: Open your web browser and go to the official Python website.

2. Select the Version: Click on the 'Downloads' tab. The website typically suggests the latest version for Windows.

3. Download the Installer: Click on the link to download the Python installer for Windows.



Step 2: Run the Installer
1. Locate the Installer: After the download is complete, locate the installer file, usually in your 'Downloads' folder.

2. Start Installation: Double-click the installer file to begin the installation process.

3. Select Installation Options:

  - Check 'Add Python to PATH': Before proceeding, make sure to tick the checkbox that says “Add Python to PATH”. This step is crucial as it allows you to run Python from the Command Prompt.

  - Choose Install Location: You can select the default location (recommended) or choose a specific location for Python installation.

4. Begin Installation: Click on “Install Now” (recommended) or “Customize Installation” if you need to change any settings.



Step 3: Verify the Installation 
1. Open Command Prompt: After the installation is complete, open the Command Prompt.

2. Check Python Version: Type python --version and press Enter. This command should return the version of Python you installed.

3. Verify Pip Installation: Type pip --version to ensure that pip (Python's package installer) is also installed.

## 🔹 Installing Pycharm ( windows )
Prerequisites
- macOS: Ensure your Mac is running on macOS 10.13 (High Sierra) or later.

- Internet Connection: You'll need a stable internet connection to download PyCharm.

- Admin Rights: Be sure you have administrative privileges on your Mac to install new software.



Step 1: Downloading PyCharm
1. Open your Web Browser: Launch Safari, Chrome, or any other browser.

2. Visit the JetBrains Website: Go to the JetBrains official website.

3. Select the Edition: Choose between the Community Edition (free) and the Professional Edition (paid). Click on the “Download” button for the Community Edition.

4. Start the Download: The download should start automatically. If it doesn’t, click on the direct link provided on the webpage.



Step 2: Installing PyCharm
1. Open the Downloaded File: Locate the downloaded .dmg file in your “Downloads” folder and double-click to open it.

2. Install PyCharm: A new window will appear with the PyCharm icon and the “Applications” folder. Drag the PyCharm icon to the “Applications” folder. This will copy PyCharm into your Applications.

3. Wait for the Copy to Finish: This might take a few minutes depending on your Mac's performance.



Step 3: Running PyCharm
1. Open PyCharm: Go to your “Applications” folder and find PyCharm. Double-click to open it.

2. Initial Setup: The first time you open PyCharm, you’ll go through an initial setup process. This includes accepting the license agreement and configuring the IDE according to your preferences (like choosing a theme).

## 🔸 Working With Files
### Plaintext files:
The most basic files - computer files containing un-formatting text
  - For configurations files
  - For source code
  - For Notes and reminders
  - For data exchange

#### Reading a text file

Commit message:

[ python intro and working with files ] - in main: program so through command line we could pick which major    section to run - resolved module / import issue --> cf. `__init__` + relative path or   module ( even if we are within the same folder ... )

README.md, after:

# Python
## 🔹 Terminal / Shell / Python Shell
Terminal - Allows you to run commands and also your programs.
There are other ways to execute code such as program in files.
- from shell enabling a programming context
- from files: which executes some program

In shell
write the command `python` which will reveal a python context for you to write some python and we will explore there for now


## 🔹 Values and Types
Types: classification of what a value represents
| Data Type | Python keyword | Examples      |
|-----------|----------------|---------------|
| Integer     | int          | 0, 4, -2, 87  |
| Floating Point Number | float | 1.2, -1.3, 11.0, 1.873 |
| Chain of characters / a string | str   | 'hello', 'yu', 'I am 9' |


- Numbers ( integers, float ): are writen as it is - typing numbers
- Strings: need to be wrapped by quotes ( single, double )
`"This is a valid string in python"
- and more that will follow...


## 🔹 Functions
Named chunk of code ( snippet ) encapsulated in order  
to be invoked on demand to perform a specific task   
( the code within that function )  
It can also return a result ( output )  
It can also accept arguments ( values between parentheses )   
which are used within the code in within the function  
Depending on how we define the function.  
- invoke / call: the function named followed by parentheses
```py
# Defining a function
def say_name( name ): return name

# Invoking the function
say_name( "Lowla" )

# Once executed, in the shell we have the following result
# 'Lowla'
```

### Built in function
Python has its own functions we can use

```py
# Using built in function "type"
type( "Lowla")

# Using built in function "int"
int(123.123)

# Using built in function "float"
float(123)

# Returning 
# <class 'str'>
# 123.123
# 123
```


## 🔹 Expressions
An expression is a statement evaluated in the code such as conditions   
for instance, using built in keywords.
A combination of values and operators ( =, -, + , etc... )

### Special operators
`//` integer devision operators --> will enforce to return an integer  
`%` modulo operator --> return the remainder of a division
`**` power operator --> return the power of the 2 numbers combined

`==` comparison operator --> check if equal
`!=` not equal


```py
# Expression
1 + 1
# Returns 2

3 / 2
# Returns 1.5

3 // 2
# Returns 1

5 % 1.5
# Returns 0.5

2 ** 3
# Returns 8
```

Note: those evaluations are also ruled by   
the mathematics parentheses priority principle.


### Expression mixing values string and operators +

#### Concatenation
Adding a value to a string is called a concatenation
```py
"Hello " + "Lowla"
# Returns "Hello Lowla"
```

#### Text Multiplication
We can multiply a string value to repeat that one

```py
"Ha" * 3
# Retuns "HaHaHa"
```


## 🔹 Variables
Its a way to store a value to be re-used at different moment
and can be re-assigned by providing a different variable.
```py
# Pattern <name-variable> = <value>
my_name = "Lowla"

# Printing my_name
print(my_name)

# Returns the value
# "Lowla"

```


## 🔹 Variables naming
Naming convention in python is mainly snake case
`snake_case_variable`

Variable naming:
- can contain letters, underscore, number
- can not start with number
- should be different than the existing one
- should not be the same name of Python keywords   
( for, while, in, if, else, print, type, etc...)
- should not be the same as another variable name - to avoid overriding

## 🔹 Errors
Errors can happen while programming and should be anticipated in order to 
prevent our code / program to stop or crash.
Key to debug: read the error - which is insightful

### Different type of error in Python
- Syntax Error: a mispell / a non interpreted caracter  
- Name Error: refering to a keyword that is mispell  
- Semantic Error: wrong logic implemented even if the syntax is correct:  
  this could lead to an unexpected output. Ex: missing parentheses in an
  operation


## 🔹 F Strings
Allows to easilly include a or multiple values on a string dynamically  
Introduced in 3.7 Python  
Short for Formatted String  
Prepended by f followed by quotes  
Inbetween quotes it is your string and the  
dynamic value between curly braces  
Values can be variable, expression or functions returning a value.
```py
my_name = 'Lowla'
my_str = f'Name: {name}'
# Returns "Name: Lowla"
```

## 🔹 Objects, Attributes and Methods
**Objects** are way to organize data and functionality in Python
_Python is considered as an object oriented language - considering   
everything is an object: numbers, variable, functions, etc..._

**Methods** are functions in a context - bound to an object

**Attributes**: are stored value within an objects

From an object, accessing its methods or attributes is by appending a  
dot after

```py
# Accessing a string method "upper"
print("Hello you, How are you?".upper())
# Returns "HELLO YOU, HOW ARE YOU?"

# Accessing a string method "lower"
print("Hello you, How are you?".lower())
# Returns 'hello you, how are you?'
```

## 🔹 Scripts
Second way of writing python, not in the shell but in a file.
Using the shell - is useful when you want to check something  
but if you want to save and longer and maintain your code, it is  
best to move forwards a file that then you will execute with the shell
Within a script we can also comment bits of code for better maintainability
- the file must be <filename>.py
- executing the script / file : `pyton <filename>.py`
- example: `python main.py`

```py
# in main.py
# Demo coding in a file to execute it as a script

text = 'Please answer the follwing questions'
print(text)

upper_text = text.upper()
print(upper_text)

lower_text = text.lower()
print(lower_text)

# Feeding the script with the user interaction
user_name = input('What is your name ? ')
user_age = int(input('How old are you'))
print(f'Your name is {user_name} and you are {user_age}')

```

```py
# In terminal
# Executing the script
python main.py

# Returns 
# Please answer the following questions
# PLEASE ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS
# please answer the following questions
# What is your name ? Lowla
# How old are you ? 100
# Your name is Lowla and you are 100
```


## 🔹 Comments
Explaning some codes - those text are ignored for the code
execution but is useful for anyone reading it.
- inline comments
To create a comment: we need to add "#" at the beginning of the line
```py
# This is a comment
```
- multi line comments
To create a comment: we need to add "```" at the beginning of the line
this is called doc string
```py
"""
Multi
Line
Comments
"""
```


## 🔹 Data Structure
A data structure is a specific way to organise data,  
it is possible to have nested list, objects for instance
### Lists ( `[ <value>, <value> ]` )
- stores differents types of values
- syntax: values should be within square brackets separated by comma
- accessible via indexes wrapped by square brackets too  
( indexes are the position number starting with 0 )
- is mutable == can change values within
```py
favorites = [ 'Hey', 0 ]
# Returns [ 'Hey', 0 ]

type( favorites )
# Returns <class 'list'>

print(favorites[1])
print([ 'Hey', 0 ][0])
# Returns 0

print(favorites[0] === [ 'Hey', 0 ][0])
# Returns True

print(len(favirotes))
# Return 2

favorites[0] = 'Aloha'
print(favorites)
['Aloha', 4]
```

### Tuples ( `( <value>, <value> )` )
Tuples are list but non mutable
- stores data, any type of values
- syntax: values should be within parentheses separated by comma
- accessible via indexes wrapped by square brackets too  
( indexes are the position number starting with 0 )
- is non mutable

```py
my_tuple = (1,2,'hey')

# Will raise an error as tuple cannot be mutable
my_tuple[0] = 0
# Traceback (most recent call last):
#  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
# TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
```
Function or methods for list and/or tuples
| function or method | list | tuple | dictionary |
| ---- | ----- | ------ | ------ |
| len() | [x] | [x] | [x]
| .append() | [x] | [] | [] |


### Dictionaries ( `{ x: <value> }` )
Allows to organize the data structure by name instead of indexes.
Dictionaries as Word with its corresponding definition but here it is 
its value.

- stores data, any type of values in a key : value pair way
- syntax: key/value pair should be express within curcly braces
- accessible using square notation with the key: <variable-name>['<key>']
- values are mutable

```py
# Definiting a dictionary
my_dict = {
  'name': 'dictionary',
  'word_number': 1
}

# Accessing value with dot notation
print( my_dict['name'] )
# Returns 'dictionary'

my_dict['extra_key'] = 'something'

print( my_dict )
# Returns {'name': 'dictionary', 'word_number': 1, 'extra_key': 'something' }

```


## 🔹 `If` Statements 
Enabling to check for a condition in order for the program   
to apply the logic associated to that statement.
Indentation creates block = in this example, the code block
is the logic to apply

```py

if 2 == 2:
  print( 'is two')
# Returns "is two"

# Checking it is different - using `is not`
if 2 is not 1:
  print('Indeed 2 is not 1')

# Checking it is different - using `!=` prepended
if 2 != 1:
  print('Indeed 2 is not 1')

```

### `Elif` statement and `else` statement
`elif` Addon to a previous condition and not a default/ignored condition
`else` allows to close the condition to a fallback exit

```py
value = 2
if str(type(value)) == "<class 'str'>":
  print("The value is a string")
elif str(type(value)) == "<class 'int'>":
  print("The value is an integer")
else:
  print("The value is neither an integer nor string")
# Returns "The value is an integer"
```


## 🔹 Or and And operators
Used in conditions by eiher enable multiple condition (OR) or by combining  
statements to valid a condition


## 🔹  Loops
#### While loop
Keep iterate until the condition is not longer true

```py
# control variable
number = 10
while number != 0:
  print(number)

  # Ensures to decrease in order to go out of the loop
  number -= 1
```

Sequences: [ range, list, tuple, dictionnary ( keys are the iterables ) ]

#### for loop
Loops/Iterates over a fixed number of times
If a number of time is needed - `range()` can be handy to create 
a collection of iterables up to the number passed as parameter.
Handy to repeat a task x times.
##### loops & sequenced data structure
```py
number = 10
"""
for <variable-holder> in <sequence>
combined to range(10) --> creating a sequence of items
"""
for n in range(10):
  print( n )

"""
Returns
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
"""
```

#### loops & dictionary data structure
```py
person = { "name": "Smith", "age": 100 }


""""
When looping over dictionnaries, passing 1 variable would represent the key
"""
for key in person:
  print(f"The key is: \"{key}\"")

"""
When looping over dictionnaries, we can get value using square notation
"""
for key in person:
  value = person[key]
  print(f'The value for the key "{key}" is "{value}"')

"""
Returning:
The value for the key "name" is "Smith"
The value for the key "age" is "100"
"""


"""
Or we can get the iterables of values from the dictionnary
using <dictionnary>.values()
"""
for value in person.values():
  print(f'The value is "{value}"')
  
"""
Returning:
The value is "Smith"
The value is "100"
"""



"""
Or we can get the collection of tuples ( keys, values ) iterables from the dictionnary using <dictionnary>.items()
We must provide 2 variables in order to get the item of each .items() tuples
"""
for key, value in person.items():
  print(f'The key is "{key}" and its value is "{value}"')

"""
Returning:
The key is "name" and its value is "Smith"
The key is "age" and its value is "100"
"""
```

## 🔹  Modules, Libraries and Classes
Modules is like a toolbox - providing some functions / classes to use within the courese
Libraries can contain multiple toolboxes ( modules )
Classes are the tiny toolbox for a specific moment


### - Class
- template creating object ( blueprint - skeleton of an
object that could be used to shape multiple objets )
- initializers ( functions ) are provided to create instances  
( instance: an object created from the blueprint )
- class often have buidt-in methods to do tasks attached to the
  concern of this class



### Useful modules 
| Module | Description |
| ------ | ----------- |
| datetime | anyting related to dates |


```py
# Importing modules
import datetime

# Accessing class / functions from modules
# <variable> = datetime.datetime.now
now = datetime.datetime.now()

# Initializing a class and passing arguments to build the object
# with name arguments based 
new_years_day = datetime.datetime(year=now.year + 1, month=1, day=1)

```



# 🔹 Installing Python ( mac )

Step 1: Check for Existing Python Installation
Before installing a new version of Python, it's a good idea to check if you already have Python installed on your Mac, which can sometimes be the case.

1. Open Terminal: You can find Terminal in the Applications folder under Utilities, or simply search for it using Spotlight (Cmd + Space).

2. Check Python Version: Type python --version or python3 --version and press Enter. If Python is installed, this will display the version number.



Step 2: Download Python
To download the latest version of Python:

1. Visit the Python Website: Open your web browser and go to the official Python website](https://www.python.org/).

2. Download Python: Click on "Downloads" and select the latest version for macOS. The website typically detects your OS and suggests the appropriate version.



Step 3: Install Python 
Once the download is complete:

1. Open the Installer: Locate the downloaded file (typically in the Downloads folder) and double-click on it.

2. Follow Installation Steps: The installer will guide you through the process. Make sure to select the option "Install launcher for all users" and "Add Python to PATH" if available.

3. Complete Installation: Click “Install” and enter your admin password if prompted.



Step 4: Verify Installation
After installation: 

1. Open Terminal Again: As in Step 1.

2. Check the Version: Type python3 --version and press Enter. This should display the newly installed Python version.



Step 5: Install pip (If Not Included)
pip is Python's package manager and is used to install Python packages. It usually comes with Python, but if not:

1. Download get-pip.py: Visit https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py, and download the get-pip.py script.

2. Run the Script: In Terminal, navigate to the download location and run python3 get-pip.py.



# 🔹 Install Pycharm ( mac )
Prerequisites
- macOS: Ensure your Mac is running on macOS 10.13 (High Sierra) or later.

- Internet Connection: You'll need a stable internet connection to download PyCharm.

- Admin Rights: Be sure you have administrative privileges on your Mac to install new software.



Step 1: Downloading PyCharm
1. Open your Web Browser: Launch Safari, Chrome, or any other browser.

2. Visit the JetBrains Website: Go to the JetBrains official website.

3. Select the Edition: Choose between the Community Edition (free) and the Professional Edition (paid). Click on the “Download” button for the Community Edition.

4. Start the Download: The download should start automatically. If it doesn’t, click on the direct link provided on the webpage.



Step 2: Installing PyCharm
1. Open the Downloaded File: Locate the downloaded .dmg file in your “Downloads” folder and double-click to open it.

2. Install PyCharm: A new window will appear with the PyCharm icon and the “Applications” folder. Drag the PyCharm icon to the “Applications” folder. This will copy PyCharm into your Applications.

3. Wait for the Copy to Finish: This might take a few minutes depending on your Mac's performance.



Step 3: Running PyCharm
1. Open PyCharm: Go to your “Applications” folder and find PyCharm. Double-click to open it.

2. Initial Setup: The first time you open PyCharm, you’ll go through an initial setup process. This includes accepting the license agreement and configuring the IDE according to your preferences (like choosing a theme).

## 🔹 Installing Python ( windows )
Step 1: Download Python
1. Visit the Official Python Website: Open your web browser and go to the official Python website.

2. Select the Version: Click on the 'Downloads' tab. The website typically suggests the latest version for Windows.

3. Download the Installer: Click on the link to download the Python installer for Windows.



Step 2: Run the Installer
1. Locate the Installer: After the download is complete, locate the installer file, usually in your 'Downloads' folder.

2. Start Installation: Double-click the installer file to begin the installation process.

3. Select Installation Options:

  - Check 'Add Python to PATH': Before proceeding, make sure to tick the checkbox that says “Add Python to PATH”. This step is crucial as it allows you to run Python from the Command Prompt.

  - Choose Install Location: You can select the default location (recommended) or choose a specific location for Python installation.

4. Begin Installation: Click on “Install Now” (recommended) or “Customize Installation” if you need to change any settings.



Step 3: Verify the Installation 
1. Open Command Prompt: After the installation is complete, open the Command Prompt.

2. Check Python Version: Type python --version and press Enter. This command should return the version of Python you installed.

3. Verify Pip Installation: Type pip --version to ensure that pip (Python's package installer) is also installed.

## 🔹 Installing Pycharm ( windows )
Prerequisites
- macOS: Ensure your Mac is running on macOS 10.13 (High Sierra) or later.

- Internet Connection: You'll need a stable internet connection to download PyCharm.

- Admin Rights: Be sure you have administrative privileges on your Mac to install new software.



Step 1: Downloading PyCharm
1. Open your Web Browser: Launch Safari, Chrome, or any other browser.

2. Visit the JetBrains Website: Go to the JetBrains official website.

3. Select the Edition: Choose between the Community Edition (free) and the Professional Edition (paid). Click on the “Download” button for the Community Edition.

4. Start the Download: The download should start automatically. If it doesn’t, click on the direct link provided on the webpage.



Step 2: Installing PyCharm
1. Open the Downloaded File: Locate the downloaded .dmg file in your “Downloads” folder and double-click to open it.

2. Install PyCharm: A new window will appear with the PyCharm icon and the “Applications” folder. Drag the PyCharm icon to the “Applications” folder. This will copy PyCharm into your Applications.

3. Wait for the Copy to Finish: This might take a few minutes depending on your Mac's performance.



Step 3: Running PyCharm
1. Open PyCharm: Go to your “Applications” folder and find PyCharm. Double-click to open it.

2. Initial Setup: The first time you open PyCharm, you’ll go through an initial setup process. This includes accepting the license agreement and configuring the IDE according to your preferences (like choosing a theme).

## 🔸 Working With Files
### Plaintext files:
The most basic files - computer files containing un-formatting text
  - For configurations files
  - For source code
  - For Notes and reminders
  - For data exchange

#### Reading a text file
Using "open" built-in function 
1. open the file ( probably binary content )
2. read the file content with `.read()` function
```py
open(<file>, <mode>)
# file: filename with extension
# mode: mode rights over the file
#   - 'r': to read a file
```
